Hi, welcome back! So
thankfully, we have a minor bug with our sound system. I said
thankfully, because it gives us a opportunity to really explore something
quite important. So, if you're in the Start Menu here in
Block Breaker and you click Start, listen to the music.
[Music Playing] Now, on
my machine, it's incredibly quick and subtle, but a lot
of users are reporting that there's a significant glitch in the
sound, when they click Start. And it's because a second
music player is running, very very
briefly, but the question is why? So, let's start the
story from the beginning. We're going to introduce
Script Execution Order, explain exactly
when scripts get called, then debug
and you're going to explain the problem and then, we'll fix it.
Cool! So, let's look at Unity's manual entry
for the execution order. So, you've seen, in your script
so far, things like Start and
Awake, that's fine.
The question is, when do they get called exactly?
What other methods do we they have, and how does this relate
between different scripts. So, let's focus
on the basics for the moment. We have an Awake method,
which we haven't used yet, which gets called the
moment the scene loads. Then, after
that and only once for every script, you get the Start Method
called, and then, we go through some fixed update loops for the
physics and then the Update loop gets called.
And then, as you can see from this black circle, we keep coming around again
and again, running the physics updates and the
game logic updates. OK.
So, the important thing to remember now is it goes Awake, Start, and then Update,
Update, Update. OK, how does this work
between scripts? Say we've got many scripts running, well then,
what order do things get called in? Very good question,
so we've made you this diagram. Now, remember where this diagram
is in the course, because this is going to be really handy
for you. So, in our game
when we get to the second level, i.e. at what
Level 1, once we click Start we're in this situation.
We have three script instances, very very briefly, at the
Start. We have the MusicPlayer, that came from the Start Scene,
we have the new MusicPlayer
in the next scene, that's about to self destruct but hasn't done yet,
and then, we have a LevelManager instance as well.
So, what actually happens is it cycles through
like this. The awake method gets called for one of the things, let's say
one of the music players then the next, then the next script instance.
Then, all the starts get called, in order, and then all
the updates get called; time is
going down the page. Now, this is really
important to understand. The other thing that's really important to understand is
that we don't know which instances of these scripts
are going to get called, in which order. There is something
in Unity called the Script Execution Order.
You can control it under Project Settings, Script
Execution Order, but we can only control things
by their class name. So
even if we try to use Script Execution Order, it would be the wrong
solution here, because whereas we could tell it to
execute all of the LevelManager instances
before the MusicPlayer instances, for example,
or the other way around. We could not say to it the
order in which it needs to execute the MusicPlayer
instances; this would be the wrong approach to try and solve this
problem. So, this is how the methods are getting
called, so what I want you to do is
to, let's put some debug statements into
our code to try and work out what's going on. Go back
to MusicPlayer.cs, and you can either
say print, or I'm going to use Debug.Log,
in this instance, because we are debugging.
The Debug.Log is very very similar in its nature to print.
So, what are we going to log? Well, I want to say
that ("Music player
awake,
ID
code... I'm actually going to do Awake, with a capital.
OK and then,
I'm going to pout a space and then, I'm going to say
get instance
ID.  Alright and then, it's a method,
and you'll see why in a moment, but what I want to do is we're basically going to log
to say, hey, I've woken up and I'm going to give you a unique ID do say
who I am. Let's put another debug
statement, in the Start here
as well. Right at the start void Start.
"Music player Start"
So now, what's going to happen is, when you run
the game your different instances of the MusicPlayer
and namely the one on the Start Scene,
in here, that we have told to persist and not be
destroyed on load. And then, the one that we've
left on Level 1, really just to be awkward,
you will have two different instances of the MusicPlayer, in this scene,
when you get to it. So, I've got a challenge for you. What I want you to
do is, I want you to run the game with that code in
place, look at the Console logs,
and digest the information from the previous slide.
This one, showing you the Order of Execution, and
then, write a brief explanation of the bug. Just jot it
down on a bit of paper, and it needs to be a sentence, but by
writing it, you can be sure that you are thinking about it carefully.
And also, when I explain what the cause
of the bug is, then you can compare notes, literally
from what I say against what you wrote and see if you agree with me.
So go ahead! Pause the video, work out what is causing this
minor music glitch, write it down, and I'll see you soon.
Fantastic!
Welcome back! So, let's take a look at this running now. Go over to Unity,
go to the Start Scene, Start Menu
Scene, Click Play. OK!
Fantastic! I'm going to look at the Console, and we have a
MusicPlayer Awake and then a MusicPlayer Start, and then, the
ID of the MusicPlayer. That's fine! So that's that single MusicPlayer
on the Start Scene, that's been told not to persist. Great!
So, that's a good starting point. Now, I'm going to
clear the console before I carry on, because it's a bit
clearer to see what's happening. So, let's click Start.
OK, here we go! We're into the
level now. The level gets loaded.
The MusicPlayer 9832
becomes Awake. Then, there's going to be a
pause while any other script's Awake methods
get called. Remember, from the slide that all the
awakes get called first. So, the Awake on
the LevelManager will be being called, and
also depending on the order that your current game
decides to run the two instances
of the MusicPlayer, and the other MusicPlayer's Awake may be being
called as well. It's not in this case. So then,
after all those awakes have happened, then the Start occurs,
on this MusicPlayer instance and then, it self destructs.
So, it's in this gap, between lines 2 and 3,
here between these two where you're getting the music playing
twice, before the self destruct, so that's what's causing
the problem. That's what's causing that
annoying little tiny glitch that you're hearing. OK
cool! So, well done, if you spotted that and you worked out how it works. Let's
take a look at a very simple solution. The very simple
solution is to take all the code in the if block and
just put it into the Awake, so that we actually make the decision whether
we're going to self destruct, on Awake rather than on
Start, so earlier. OK!
I've saved that code. Let's run again.
Starting on the Start Scene.
Here we go! Get the same sort of thing here. Clear!
Now when we play, we get Awake
and then, immediately before the Start even runs,
we get the duplicate MusicPlayer. It's self destructing, we
don't even get the message that the Start method has run, because the
object has been destroyed. OK!
So, that's it it's gone, and we're just left with one
MusicPlayer in the scene, that's happily playing the music.
So well done! Hopefully you've understood that. As a
recap, the Script Execution Order goes like something
like this. All
the instances of MusicPlayer, may occur
before a LevelManager or the instance,
or instances of LevelManager may occur before MusicPlayer. That
script order is not determined, unless you tell Unity explicitly.
The Awake methods all get called first, so it cycles
through the awakes, and then, it cycles through the starts.
And the problem we had, was that we were initializing
on Start, not Awake, so there was a gap between the music playing
in the duplicate on Awake, and then, you had to wait
until the Start method occurred, before it actually self destructed.
And the solution was simply moving this
code to Awake.
Fantastic! You can remove your Debug lines, if you want.
I don't think they need to be there any longer.
In fact, you can move the whole Start method. There you go,
nice and clear. The if statement is inside Awake,
and your MusicPlayer glitch should be gone forever.
By the way, if you want some further reading, this whole
usage of statics and instances like this, and then,
saying does an instance of this thing already exist,
is called a Singleton Pattern.
Let me show you a couple of good resources. Firstly,
UnityPatterns.com about Singletons, is a
good place to go, and it will show you three different types.
We're basically using the Persistent Singleton, which is
slightly different logic. So, that's one way to look up, one
place to look up Singletons. The other good resource here,
is there's a book called GameProgrammingPatterns.com,
which is a great book. I've got it in hardback or
soft-back, but if you scroll down to the web, you can read now.
And then, there's a section on Singletons here.
Alright, this will again tell you about the Singleton Pattern.
So, C# in Unity doesn't explicitly
support Singletons, but we create a Singleton Pattern
by the way that we use our code. So congratulations!
And hopefully that's all clearer for you, and I'll see you soon!